Welcome back to another deep dive.
Today, we are heading into territory that I think every single person listening has navigated.
Oh, for sure.
Usually without a map and usually with a fair bit of anxiety.
We're talking about that messy gray area between personal freedom and community responsibility.
It is the classic tension, isn't it?
The, you know, I can do what I want versus the
We are in this together.
Exactly.
And it usually happens at the most inconvenient times.
You're at a dinner party or a holiday gathering or I don't know, even just hanging out with friends from church.
And you have this moment where you realize, okay, I know I am technically allowed to do this thing, eat this, drink this, watch this.
but I have a sneaking suspicion it's gonna cause a problem for the person sitting next to me.
And that hesitation, that little pause.
It's actually a very good instinct.
Well today we're gonna validate that instinct.
We are digging into a sermon series from the church, CCCC, and we're zooming in with a laser focus on Romans chapter 14.
Specifically verses 13 through 15.
This is really where the rubber meets the road on how we handle these disagreements.
And we should probably set the theological stage here because context is everything.
It really is.
I mean, Romans is a heavyweight book.
And in chapter 14, Paul is writing to a really mixed community.
You've got Jewish Christians who grew up with strict laws, and then you have Gentile Christians who didn't.
And they're clashing over what theologians call a diaphora.
Adiaphora, yeah.
Or disputable matters.
Discutable matters.
I love that term.
It sounds so polite for what is essentially people arguing over dinner.
Chuckles.
It is exactly that.
These are issues that aren't explicitly commanded or forbidden in Scripture.
So back then, it was things like kosher food, wine, observing certain holy days.
Right.
Today, it could be alcohol, Halloween, schooling choices, how you spend your money.
I mean, the list is basically endless.
So in the verses right before this, verses one through 12, Paul has been telling them to stop judging each other, stop looking down your nose at the guy who eats the bacon, and stop judging the guy who doesn't.
Exactly.
Who were you to judge someone else's servant?
That was the whole message.
But here's the pivot.
And this is why we're focusing on just these three verses today.
Okay.
The message changes.
It goes from stop judging to start loving.
That sounds nice on a bumper sticker, but the source material suggests this is actually a much harder standard to live by.
It is so much harder.
Because the question shifts from, am I allowed to do this?
Which is all about my rights.
Right.
To, will this build up my brother or sister?
Which is about my responsibility.
It's a huge move from defense to offense, but in terms of love.
Okay, let's look at the text then, verse 13.
Paul writes, there is a lot to unpack in just that one sentence.
The phrase stumbling block is one I've heard in church circles my whole life.
And usually it's used in a very,
passive aggressive way.
You know, like, oh, your tattoo is a stumbling block to me, which basically means I don't like it.
That is probably the most common misuse of the term.
We tend to think a stumbling block is anything that annoys us or offends our personal taste or just, you know, it makes us uncomfortable.
But that's not what Paul means.
Not even close.
If you look at the Greek and how the reform tradition interprets this, it is way more serious.
A stumbling block is an obstacle that causes someone to fall.
To fall.
In a spiritual context, it is an action that influences a fellow believer to act against their conscience.
It trips them up spiritually, it pressures them to sin.
Okay, we need to clarify that.
How does me doing something I'm allowed to do cause you to sin?
That is the absolute crux of the issue.
The sin isn't necessarily the action itself, like eating a specific food.
The sin is violating your conscience.
So if I pressure you to do something that you believe is wrong, I am tempting you to sin against your own conviction.
The source material used a really heavy example to illustrate this.
It was about alcohol.
Yes.
And this is where we have to be real with people's backgrounds.
Imagine a young believer who comes from a history of severe alcoholism.
Maybe they grew up in a home where alcohol meant violence or abuse or poverty.
For this person, a bottle of wine isn't just a beverage.
It's a symbol of destruction.
So for them, their conscience has drawn a hard line.
I cannot drink this.
Exactly.
To them, drinking is sin.
Now, you introduce a stronger believer.
This is someone who knows their Bible.
They know Jesus turned water into wine.
They know Psalm 104 says, wine is a gift to gladden the heart.
They have Christian liberty.
So they are objectively right.
They can have a glass of wine with dinner.
Theologically, yes.
But here's the scenario.
They're at a small group dinner.
The strong believer pours a glass and says to the former addict, hey, come on, don't be a legalist.
You're free in Christ.
Have a drink with us.
I physically cringed hearing that.
You should.
Because look at what is happening.
If that younger believer caves to the pressure and drinks, why are they doing it?
Not because they've suddenly understood the theology.
They're doing it to fit in.
Right.
They're acting out of shame or peer pressure.
They're drinking while their conscience is screaming,
This is wrong.
And that's the tragedy.
That's it.
The strong believer hasn't liberated them.
They have led them into sin.
They have taught them to ignore the warning signals of their own soul just to be socially accepted.
That is a massive distinction.
It's not, I'm offended you're drinking.
It's, you are bullying me into violating my relationship with God.
Perfectly.
That is what it means to put a stumbling block in someone's way.
You are prioritizing your freedom over their spiritual safety.
This leads us directly into verse 14, which honestly feels like a theological riddle.
It really does.
Paul writes, I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself, but it is unclean for anyone who thinks it unclean.
This verse is just a master class in holding two truths in tension.
Let's start with the first half.
Nothing is unclean.
I mean, Paul is a Jewish rabbi.
He grew up with Leviticus.
He knows about pork and shellfish.
How can he say nothing is unclean?
This is the beauty of the New Covenant.
The source material emphasizes this so strongly.
Paul is persuaded in the Lord Jesus.
This isn't just Paul's opinion, this is revealed truth.
Jesus fulfilled the ceremonial laws.
You see this in Mark 7, where Jesus declares all foods clean.
You see it in Acts 10 with Peter's vision.
So the objective truth is that the ham sandwich is fine.
That old ceremonial barrier is gone.
Correct.
Food is adiapher.
It's indifferent.
It has no moral value in itself.
It's just protein.
But then he drops the other shoe.
But it is unclean for anyone who thinks it unclean.
That sounds, well, it sounds like relativism.
Like it's true if you believe it.
It sounds like that, but it's actually about the authority of the conscience.
The analysis from the source is really helpful here.
Your conscience can be incorrect, but it is still authoritative.
Wait, unpack that.
How can it be authoritative if it's wrong?
Okay, think of your conscience like the nerve endings in your hand.
It's job is to tell you when you are touching something hot, so you pull away.
Right.
Now, suppose your nerves are hypersensitive and they tell you a lukewarm cup of coffee is burning you.
Objectively, the cup isn't dangerous.
Your sensors are wrong.
But, and this is the key, if you force yourself to touch it while believing it will burn you, you are training yourself to ignore pain.
You are damaging your own internal system.
I see.
So if a believer thinks eating pork is a sin against God and they eat it anyway.
They are sinning.
not because of the pig, but because of the rebellion.
They are looking at what they believe to be God's law and saying, I don't care, I'm gonna do it anyway.
And that attitude itself is sinful.
Yes, as the text says later, whatever does not proceed from faith is sin.
So the subjective reality of the believer's conscience matters just as much as the objective reality of the food.
In terms of how we treat them, yes.
We have to respect where their conscience is, even if we know their theology hasn't quite caught up yet.
The sermon notes from CCCC brought up a really specific example here that I found fascinating, mostly because it's so foreign to us today, the issue of blood.
Yes, blood sausage or foods prepared with blood.
This was a huge issue in the early church.
In Acts 15, the Jerusalem Council actually told Gentile believers to abstain from blood to keep peace with Jewish believers.
Okay, so let's imagine a modern scenario.
You're at a potluck.
You have a sister in Christ who reads Acts 15 and believes, genuinely, that eating blood sausage is an abomination.
And you, the strong theologian, know that technically that rule was a cultural bridge for a specific time, and we are under the law.
You are objectively right.
You can't eat it.
But if you turn to her and say, oh, don't be ridiculous, eat this, you are crushing her.
You are.
You are using your theological knowledge as a weapon.
You're forcing her to choose between your approval and what she thinks is God's will.
And Paul says,
Don't you dare do that.
It really creates a hierarchy of values.
Theology is important.
But love is supreme.
Exactly.
And that brings us to verse 15, which I think is the emotional peak of this entire section.
Verse 15,
We need to stop on that word grieved, because again in English, grieved can sound like sad or upset.
You know, oh, he was grieved that they ran out of pie.
Right, but the Greek is heavier than that.
Much heavier.
The source really emphasizes that grieved here means spiritual distress, turmoil.
It is the emotion of someone whose faith is being shaken to its core.
So if the standard was just, don't annoy anyone,
We'd never do anything.
I mean, someone is always going to dislike your choices.
If the standard was just dislike, the church would be paralyzed.
We'd be ruled by the most easily offended person in the room.
Paul isn't saying we have to walk on eggshells to avoid annoyance.
He's talking about avoiding destruction.
You not destroy the one for whom Christ died.
That line just stops me in my tracks every single time I read it.
It puts the whole debate into perspective, doesn't it?
It forces a comparison.
On one side of the scale, you have my right to eat a piece of meat or drink a glass of wine.
And on the other side, you have a person, a person Jesus bled for.
That is the whole argument.
If Christ was willing to give up his life, his status, his very blood for that person, surely you can give up a ham sandwich.
When you put it that way, asserting my rights feels incredibly petty.
It is petty.
And the source material really challenges us here.
We often look at weaker believers, people with lots of rules and scruples, as inconvenient.
They are the fun killers.
We roll our eyes at them.
Oh, great.
Dave is here.
Put the beer away.
Exactly.
But Paul says, look at Dave differently.
Dave is a soul purchased by God.
You cannot use your liberty to tear down the work God is doing in Dave's life.
It shifts the question from legal rights to relational worth.
And that is the definition of walking in love.
love is willing to limit itself for the good of the beloved.
Now, I want to pivot to how this lands today, because the source material talks a lot about our current cultural context, especially here in the West.
We are obsessed with freedom.
We really are.
And in our culture, freedom is usually defined as autonomy, self-expression.
It's, I have my truth, I have my rights, and you need to deal with it.
It's very adversarial.
It's a, don't tread on me mindset.
And when you bring that mindset into the church, it is a disaster.
It just creates polarization.
It creates a low trust environment where everyone's just shouting about their rights.
But Romans 14 offers a counterculture.
It absolutely does.
It offers a freedom that is governed by love.
The source uses this beautiful phrase for the strong Christian, quiet restraint.
Quiet restraint.
I really like that.
What does that look like practically?
It means that if you are truly strong, if you are secure in your faith and your theology,
You don't need to flaunt it.
You don't need to prove you are free.
You have the strength to hold back.
So just because I can doesn't mean I must.
Precisely.
You read the room.
If exercising your freedom is going to hurt the conscience of the person next to you, you quietly abstain.
You don't make a scene, you just choose love.
But I have to ask, because I know some listeners are thinking this, doesn't this give the weaker brother all the power?
If I always have to be the one to fold, doesn't the church just become a place of lowest common denominator rules?
That is a very, very important nuance.
The source notes that while Paul protects the weak conscience, he doesn't give the weak the authority to set the rules for everyone else.
So I cannot do this is valid, but you cannot do this is overstepping.
Correct.
The weaker brother needs to grow.
But the way they grow isn't by being bullied into it.
And the stronger brother needs to be patient, but he doesn't have to agree that the rule is universal for all time.
So we stop asking, show me the rule, which is that lawyer mindset, and we start asking, will this build us up?
We move from a courtroom to a family room.
We aren't trying to win a case.
We are trying to care for our siblings.
So let's get practical.
We've done the theology.
We've felt the weight of it.
If I'm walking into my small group or a church potluck at CCCC this week, how do I actually do this?
The source gave us three habits.
Yes, and I love these because they are so actionable.
The first one, ask Ask Engaging Act.
That seems simple enough.
It is, but we rarely do it.
If you're in mixed company, maybe you're hosting, just ask, hey, is everyone comfortable if we serve wine with dinner?
Does anyone have an issue with this type of music?
It signals immediately that you care more about them than the stuff.
Right, it removes the surprise factor.
It lowers the anxiety in the room before it even starts.
Okay, habit number two, teach without pushing.
This is specifically for the strong believer who is frustrated with the weak believer.
You see someone who is trapped in legalism.
Maybe they think they can't watch certain movies or play cards, and you just want to fix them.
You want to shake them and say, you're missing out.
The Bible doesn't say that.
But you can't fix a conscience by force.
You teach them scripture.
You patiently explain the theology of the new covenant, but you do it over time.
You let their conscience catch up to their theology at its own speed.
You disciple them.
You don't bulldoze them.
Exactly.
Pushing someone to violate their conscience before they are ready,
is dangerous.
And the third habit, defer quickly, discuss slowly.
This is the golden rule for conflict.
In the immediate moment, at the table, at the party, if you sense tension, defer.
Just give it up.
Give it up, put the glass down, change the subject.
Prioritize the relationship in that second.
Don't have the big theological debate when emotions are high.
But discuss slowly means we don't just ignore it forever.
Right.
Later, over coffee, when everyone is calm,
You open the Bible.
You talk about it.
You seek unity and understanding, but you separate the moment from the process.
That is so helpful.
It stops freedom from becoming a weapon in the moment.
And it keeps the church from fracturing over things that aren't the gospel.
We have covered a lot of ground today, from blood sausage to modern polarization.
But as we wrap up, it really seems like Romans 14.1315 is giving us a picture of what a mature community looks like.
It is.
It's a community where we belong to the Lord so we don't judge each other.
And we belong to each other, so we don't hinder each other.
It sounds restrictive at first, you know, giving up my rights.
But is it really?
I don't think so.
I think it's the ultimate freedom.
It is the freedom to be like Jesus.
Jesus had all the rights in the universe, and he laid them down to serve us.
When we do that for each other, we aren't losing.
We are looking like our king.
That is the aha moment.
True freedom isn't doing whatever I want.
It's being free enough to love you more than I love my preferences.
Amen to that.
So here is the provocative thought we wanna leave you with today.
We've talked about food and drink, but I mean, this applies to everything.
Take a look at your life this week, in your interactions online, at work, at church, ask yourself this, are you using your freedom to prove a point?
Or are you using it to protect the people Christ died for?
Because at the end of the day, you can be right, or you can be loving.
And the kingdom of God, love is the final metric.
Thanks for joining us on this deep dive.
We'll catch you next time.